{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2639
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia-Italic;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red38\green38\blue38;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green132\blue181;
\red120\green128\blue133;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c20000\c20000\c20000;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c9412\c59216\c76078;
\cssrgb\c54510\c57255\c59216;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs60 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Black Panther: Wakanda Forever
\f1\b0\fs42 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/contributors/robert-daniels"}}{\fldrslt 
\f2\b\fs19\fsmilli9816 \cf4 \cb3 \strokec4 Robert Daniels}}
\f2\b\fs19\fsmilli9816 \cb3 \'a0
\f1\b0 \cf5 \strokec5 November 09, 2022
\fs42 \cf2 \cb1 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf2 \cb3 The center of \'93Black Panther: Wakanda Forever\'94\'97the sequel to the hugely popular \'93{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/black-panther-2018"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Black Panther}},\'94 and a tribute to the late\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/chadwick-boseman"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Chadwick Boseman}}\'97is sincere, even if the overall film feels manufactured. It begins with a funeral for the recently deceased King T'Challa. Shuri ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/letitia-wright"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Letitia Wright}}) and Queen Ramonda ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/angela-bassett"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Angela Bassett}}) are dressed in white, following the black coffin, whose top features a silver emblem of the Black Panther mask and the crossed arms of the Wakanda salute. Their mournful procession, winding through the kingdom, is contrasted with slow-motion tracking shots of dancers jubilantly dancing in memory of their fallen king. After the coffin arrives at a clearing, where it ceremoniously rises to the sky, we cut to an earnest, emotional montage of Boseman as T'Challa. The solemn, aching continuum of images soon forms the \'93Marvel Studios\'94 logo, announcing that this is still a Marvel movie.\'a0And \'93Wakanda Forever\'94 is all the worse for it.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 What was the secret ingredient for the success of \'93Black Panther\'94? Similar to the resplendent, secluded African nation of Wakanda, \'93Black Panther\'94 existed just outside of the Marvel Cinematic Universe. It mostly stood on its own without the crushing requirements felt by every other film: The humor existed between the characters, not as random references to another property; the characters (with\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/andy-serkis"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Andy Serkis}}\'a0as Ulysses Klaue as an exception) were particular to the story; the concerns rarely drifted toward franchise building aspirations.\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa480\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 But writer/director\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/ryan-coogler"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Ryan Coogler}}\'a0and his co-writer\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/joe-robert-cole"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Joe Robert Cole}}\'a0don't possess the same kind of freedom with this melancholy\'a0sequel. Some\'a0limitations aren't within their control, such as the tragic death of Boseman. Others feel like a capitulation to assimilate into a movie-making machine.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 The hulking\'a0script is chock-full of ideas and themes. Rather than fighting their common enemy (white colonists), two kingdoms helmed by people of color are pitted against each other (an idea that\'a0never thematically lands), and the film must delve into the cultural pain that still exists from the historical annihilation of Central and South America\'92s Indigenous kingdoms. It must also contend with a bevy of other requirements: setting up the\'a0Marvel TV series\'a0\'93Ironheart\'94 (in which\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/dominique-thorne"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Dominique Thorne}}\'a0will star), acknowledging The Snap, grieving Boseman\'92s death, and finding a new Black Panther. These competing interests are no less smoothed out by MCU\'92s blockbuster demands (that this must be a mainstream hit and usher in the next phase of the cinematic universe) and the weight of satiating Black folks who feel seen by the fantastical confirmation of Black regalism. It\'92s too much for one movie. And you get the sense that this should\'92ve been two.\'a0 \'a0 \'a0\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 At nearly every turn, "Wakanda Forever" fails, starting with its setup. Colonist countries, now afraid of an African superpower, are scouring the world, from sea to sea, searching for vibranium (the metallic ore that powers the African kingdom). A young scientist named Riri (Thorne, treated as a plucky afterthought) plays a role in a search that leads mercenaries deep underwater where they encounter Namor/Kukulkan (a menacing and bold\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/tenoch-huerta"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Tenoch Huerta}}), the king of Talokan, and his people, who are none too happy with the surface world. They want to destroy it. The godly Namor, his ears pointed to the sky, his winged feet fluttering, later surfaces in Wakanda. With water still dripping from his jade earrings and glimmering, vibranium-pearl-gold necklace, he approaches a still mournful Ramonda and a bitter Shuri with a threat masquerading as an alliance. His appearance causes Wakanda to turn to Everett Ross ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/martin-freeman"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Martin Freeman}}), which leads to other cameos and subplots that weigh down the entire film with franchise expectations.\'a0\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa480\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 What\'92s imperative to \'93Black Panther: Wakanda Forever\'94 is the way Coogler centers righteous rage. Ramonda\'92s first big scene is her admonishing the United Nations for expecting her to share vibranium with the world, even as they try to steal the resource from her nation. Bassett, with a capital-A, acts in a sequence where her voice booms, her gaze is fixed and unforgiving, and the venom is felt. And yet, Shuri, who has buried herself in her lab, developing dangerous weapons, feels worse. She wants to see the world burn. Their shared anger forces a spew of short-sighted decisions that lead to further escalations with Namor\'97who desperately angles to avenge his mother and his ancestors. The film attempts to position the trio as different stages of grief, but in trying to get viewers up to speed on the atrocities experienced by Namor, it becomes slow and overblown.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 Maybe somewhere a way existed to connect these arcs. But that would require better visual storytelling than the movie offers. Far too often, the dialogue stays on\'a0the surface, either by providing reams of exposition, externalizing exactly what\'92s on the character\'92s mind or by trying to meld together the real-life loss felt by the actors with that of the characters. The latter certainly offers these performers a necessary chance to process their hurt on screen, but\'a0when did filmmakers forget how to show without telling? Why are contemporary blockbusters so enamored with holding the audience\'92s hand by providing every minute detail? At one point, after Namor explains his entire backstory, Shuri responds with, \'93Why are you telling me all of this?\'94 It feels like a note Coogler gave to himself.\'a0\'a0\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 The shortcomings in dialogue and story, and how often \'93Black Panther: Wakanda Forever\'94 bows to IP-driven needs, would be easier to stomach if the visual components weren\'92t so creaky. The jittery fight sequences are too difficult to follow: inelegant compositions blur into an incomprehensible sludge with every cut by editors\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/michael-p-shawver"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Michael P. Shawver}},\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/kelley-dixon"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Kelley Dixon}}, and\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/jennifer-lame"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Jennifer Lame}}. Admittedly, there were projection issues with my screening of the film, so I will refrain from totally dismissing the all-too-dark lighting, but the actual framing by cinematographer\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/autumn-durald"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Autumn Durald}}\'a0Arkapaw, working with\'a0the film\'92s copious visual effects, lacks a sense of space anyways. Scenes of everyday life in Wakanda\'97Black folks shopping, communities laughing and enjoying each other\'92s company\'97that once filled the viewer with joy feel artificial here. The vast landscapes of the nation, which once were filled with splendor, are now murky backgrounds. Some of that awe is recaptured when we see Talokan and its immense Mayan architecture and decorative wall paintings. But you wish, much like \'93Black Panther,\'94 that Namor was first given his movie where these scenes could breathe, and we could become as integrated into this kingdom as we became in Wakanda.\'a0\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa480\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Ultimately, this film attempts to set up the future through Shuri. Wright is a talented actress with the ability to emotionally shoulder a movie\'a0when given good material. But she is constantly working against the script here. She fights past a cringe cameo; she fights past clunky jokes; she fights past an ending that feels all too neat. An assured and charismatic\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/winston-duke"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Winston Duke}}\'a0as M\'92Baku is there to help, and\'a0a misused\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/lupita-nyongo"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Lupita Nyong'o}}\'a0as Nakia is there for assistance. Okoye, played by\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/danai-gurira"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Danai Gurira}}, provides resilience. And new addition\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/cast-and-crew/michaela-coel"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Michaela Coel}}\'a0(\'93I May Destroy You\'94) as Aneka, a quirky character who tonally doesn\'92t work in this somber ensemble, is there for comic relief ... I guess? In any case, the collective front of these performers isn't enough to stem the tide of a movie that relies on shouting matches and broad visual and political metaphors that have been boiled down to their uncomplicated essence rather than their complex truths (which isn\'92t unlike Rihanna\'92s turgid soundtrack offering \'93Lift Me Up\'94).\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 A major sea battle ensues, new, ropey gadgets are employed, and loose ends are inarticulately tied. Another montage dedicated to Boseman occurs, and while the film is messy, you\'92re relieved that it begins and ends on the right foot. That is, until the saccharine post-credit scene. I\'92m not sure what Coogler was thinking. He had more weight on him for this movie than any filmmaker deserves. But when this scene occurred, I audibly groaned at what amounts to a weepy, treacly moment that\'92s wholly unnecessary, emotionally manipulative, and partially unearned. It\'92s one of the many instances where \'93Black Panther: Wakanda Forever\'94 might have its heart in the right place but is in the wrong mindset and the worst space\'97at the center of a contrived cinematic universe\'97to mourn on its own terms.\'a0\'a0\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf2 \cb3 Available in theaters on November 11th.
\f1\i0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rogerebert.com/contributors/robert-daniels"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs42 \cf4 \strokec4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f2\b\fs19\fsmilli9816 \cf4 \cb3 Robert Daniels\cb1 \
}}\pard\pardeftab720\sa60\partightenfactor0

\f4\fs17\fsmilli8724 \cf2 \cb3 Robert Daniels is a freelance film critic based in Chicago with a MA in English. He\'92s the founder of 812filmreviews, and he\'92s written for ThePlaylist, Consequence of Sound, and Mediaversity.\cb1 \
}